docs/guides/src/main/server/configuration.adoc, before:

<#import "/templates/guide.adoc" as tmpl>
<#import "/templates/kc.adoc" as kc>
<#import "/templates/links.adoc" as links>

<@tmpl.guide
title="Configuring Keycloak"
summary="An overview of the server configuration">

This guide describes underlying core concepts of Keycloak configuration. It includes configuration guidelines for optimizing Keycloak for faster startup and low memory footprint.

== Server options

You can view the server options by adding the `help` option for individual commands:

.Listing build options
<@kc.build parameters="--help"/>

.Listing configuration options
<@kc.start parameters="--help"/>

Alternatively, you can see the server options at <@links.server id="all-config"/>.

Server options are loaded from different sources in a specific order and they use different formats. If an option is defined in different sources, the order of resolution is the order in the following table:

|===
|*Source* | *Format*

|CLI
|--db-url-host=<value>

|Environment Variable
|KC_DB_URL_HOST

|`conf/keycloak.conf`
|db-url-host=<value>
|===

Given the `db-url-host` option as an example, you would set this property as follows:

.Command-line argument
<@kc.start parameters="--db-url-host=mykeycloakdb"/>

.Environment variable
```
export KC_DB_URL_HOST=mykeycloakdb
```

.`conf/keycloak.conf`
```
db-url-host=mykeycloakdb
```

The configuration source and the corresponding format you should use is use-case specific. That decision depends on the platform where the server is deployed and the runtime optimizations you are seeking. For instance, if you deploy the server into Kubernetes, you would probably rely
on environment variables to configure the server. However, you are not limited to a single configuration source or format.

== Configuration commands and stages

The server options are narrowed to a specific command or configuration stage. The goal is to perform a series of optimizations in a specific order to achieve optimal startup and runtime performance. This configuration occurs in two stages:

First stage:: Configuration performed before starting the server in order to build an optimized server image for use at runtime
Second stage:: Configuration performed as part of starting the server

=== First stage: Build an optimized Keycloak image

The first stage involves running the `build` command and setting any **build option** available from this command to configure the server.

The configuration options at <@links.server id="all-config"/> include options that are marked with a tool icon. This icon indicates they are build options. Build options take effect only when you apply them to the `build` command.

You can also check which options require a build by looking at the `help` message of the `build` command:

<@kc.build parameters="--help"/>

The `build` command can produce an immutable and optimized server image, which is similar to building a container image. In addition to persisting build options, this command also performs optimizations for the best startup and runtime performance. The result is that much processing for starting and running the server is performed before starting Keycloak, so Keycloak is able to start up and run faster later on.

The following are some optimizations performed by the `build` command:

* Closed-world assumption about installed providers, which means that no need exists to re-create the registry at every startup
* Configuration files are pre-parsed to reduce I/O when starting the server
* Database specific resources are configured and prepared to run against a certain database vendor
* By persisting build options into the server image, the server does not perform any additional step to interpret configuration options and (re)configure itself

.Run the `build` command to set the database to PostgreSQL before startup:
<@kc.build parameters="--db=postgres"/>

Once you run the `build` command, you do not need to set the same **build options** when you start the server.

=== Second stage: Starting Keycloak

The second stage involves starting the server by using the `start` command and including **configuration options** with the appropriate values.

.Run the `start` command to start the server while setting various database options
<@kc.start parameters="--db-url-host=keycloak-postgres --db-username=keycloak --db-password=change_me --hostname mykeycloak.acme.com"/>

Note that if you invoke commands containing special shell characters such as `;` using the CLI, you need to escape those characters. In that situation, you might choose to use the `keycloak.conf` file to set configuration options instead.

== Optimization by using a configuration file

Most optimizations to startup and memory footprint can be achieved by using the `build` command. Additionally, you can use the `conf/keycloak.conf` file to set configuration options. Using this file avoids some necessary parsing steps when providing configuration options using the CLI or environment variables.

.Set any build option
<@kc.build parameters="--db=postgres"/>

.Set any configuration option to `conf/keycloak.conf`
```
db-url-host=keycloak-postgres
db-username=keycloak
db-password=change_me
hostname mykeycloak.acme.com
```

.Start the server
<@kc.start/>

By using the `keycloak.conf` file, the server can omit some steps at startup. As a result, the server starts faster.

== The auto-build option: automatic detection when the server needs a build

Under certain circumstances, you might prefer to allow a longer startup time in favor of updating the values of build options when starting the server. Using the `auto-build` option, you can perform the two configuration stages by using a single command. Note that using `auto-build` is very likely to double the startup time for Keycloak. For most environments, this approach is not optimal.

You start the server by entering the following command:

.Using the `auto-build` option
<@kc.start parameters="--auto-build --db postgres --db-url-host keycloak-postgres --db-username keycloak --db-password change_me --hostname mykeycloak.acme.com"/>

By including the `auto-build` option, the server calculates the build options that have changed and runs the `build` command, if necessary, before starting the server.

== Configuring the server by using configuration files

By default, the server always fetches configuration options from the `conf/keycloak.conf` file. For a new installation,
this file holds only the recommended settings for running in production and those settings are commented out.

You can also specify a different configuration file by using the `[-cf|--config-file] option by entering the following command:

.Running the `build` command using a custom configuration file
<@kc.build rootParameters="-cf myconfig.conf"/>

.Running the `start` command using a custom configuration file
<@kc.start rootParameters="-cf myconfig.conf"/>

Changes to any *build option* defined in the `keycloak.conf` file that is targeted for the `build` command are ignored
if the value differs from the value for the last `build` command. In this case, make sure you run the `build` command again so that
any build option is updated accordingly.

=== Development versus production mode

The server supports the following operating modes:

Development mode:: This mode is activated every time you run the `start-dev` command. In this mode, some key configuration options are set to make it possible to start the
server for development purposes without the burden of having to define additional settings that are mandatory for production.

Production mode:: This mode is activated when you run the `build` or `start` command. Use this mode to set any configuration option that
is needed for deploying Keycloak in production.

By default, the configuration options for the production mode are commented out in the `conf/keycloak.conf`. These examples
 are meant to give you an idea about the main settings to consider when running in production.

== Unsupported server options

In most cases, the available options from the server configuration should suffice to configure the server.
However, you might need to use properties directly from Quarkus to enable a specific behavior or capability that is missing from the server configuration.

As much as possible, avoid using properties directly from Quarkus. If your need is essential, consider opening an https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/issues/new?assignees=&labels=kind%2Fenhancement%2Cstatus%2Ftriage&template=enhancement.yml[issue] first and help us
to improve the server configuration.

To configure the server using Quarkus properties, perform the following steps:

. Create a `conf/quarkus.properties` file and define any property you need.
. Run the `build` command to apply the settings to the server

For a complete list of Quarkus properties, see the https://quarkus.io/guides/all-config[Quarkus documentation] .

</@tmpl.guide>

Commit message:

Add section on how to add the initial admin user
Closes #10531

Co-authored-by: Dominik Guhr <89905860+DGuhr@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/guides/src/main/server/configuration.adoc, after:

<#import "/templates/guide.adoc" as tmpl>
<#import "/templates/kc.adoc" as kc>
<#import "/templates/links.adoc" as links>

<@tmpl.guide
title="Configuring Keycloak"
summary="An overview of the server configuration">

This guide describes underlying core concepts of Keycloak configuration. It includes configuration guidelines for optimizing Keycloak for faster startup and low memory footprint.

== Server options

You can view the server options by adding the `help` option for individual commands:

.Listing build options
<@kc.build parameters="--help"/>

.Listing configuration options
<@kc.start parameters="--help"/>

Alternatively, you can see the server options at <@links.server id="all-config"/>.

Server options are loaded from different sources in a specific order and they use different formats. If an option is defined in different sources, the order of resolution is the order in the following table:

|===
|*Source* | *Format*

|CLI
|--db-url-host=<value>

|Environment Variable
|KC_DB_URL_HOST

|`conf/keycloak.conf`
|db-url-host=<value>
|===

Given the `db-url-host` option as an example, you would set this property as follows:

.Command-line argument
<@kc.start parameters="--db-url-host=mykeycloakdb"/>

.Environment variable
```
export KC_DB_URL_HOST=mykeycloakdb
```

.`conf/keycloak.conf`
```
db-url-host=mykeycloakdb
```

The configuration source and the corresponding format you should use is use-case specific. That decision depends on the platform where the server is deployed and the runtime optimizations you are seeking. For instance, if you deploy the server into Kubernetes, you would probably rely
on environment variables to configure the server. However, you are not limited to a single configuration source or format.

== Configuration commands and stages

The server options are narrowed to a specific command or configuration stage. The goal is to perform a series of optimizations in a specific order to achieve optimal startup and runtime performance. This configuration occurs in two stages:

First stage:: Configuration performed before starting the server in order to build an optimized server image for use at runtime
Second stage:: Configuration performed as part of starting the server

=== First stage: Build an optimized Keycloak image

The first stage involves running the `build` command and setting any **build option** available from this command to configure the server.

The configuration options at <@links.server id="all-config"/> include options that are marked with a tool icon. This icon indicates they are build options. Build options take effect only when you apply them to the `build` command.

You can also check which options require a build by looking at the `help` message of the `build` command:

<@kc.build parameters="--help"/>

The `build` command can produce an immutable and optimized server image, which is similar to building a container image. In addition to persisting build options, this command also performs optimizations for the best startup and runtime performance. The result is that much processing for starting and running the server is performed before starting Keycloak, so Keycloak is able to start up and run faster later on.

The following are some optimizations performed by the `build` command:

* Closed-world assumption about installed providers, which means that no need exists to re-create the registry at every startup
* Configuration files are pre-parsed to reduce I/O when starting the server
* Database specific resources are configured and prepared to run against a certain database vendor
* By persisting build options into the server image, the server does not perform any additional step to interpret configuration options and (re)configure itself

.Run the `build` command to set the database to PostgreSQL before startup:
<@kc.build parameters="--db=postgres"/>

Once you run the `build` command, you do not need to set the same **build options** when you start the server.

=== Second stage: Starting Keycloak

The second stage involves starting the server by using the `start` command and including **configuration options** with the appropriate values.

.Run the `start` command to start the server while setting various database options
<@kc.start parameters="--db-url-host=keycloak-postgres --db-username=keycloak --db-password=change_me --hostname mykeycloak.acme.com"/>

Note that if you invoke commands containing special shell characters such as `;` using the CLI, you need to escape those characters. In that situation, you might choose to use the `keycloak.conf` file to set configuration options instead.

== Optimization by using a configuration file

Most optimizations to startup and memory footprint can be achieved by using the `build` command. Additionally, you can use the `conf/keycloak.conf` file to set configuration options. Using this file avoids some necessary parsing steps when providing configuration options using the CLI or environment variables.

.Set any build option
<@kc.build parameters="--db=postgres"/>

.Set any configuration option to `conf/keycloak.conf`
```
db-url-host=keycloak-postgres
db-username=keycloak
db-password=change_me
hostname mykeycloak.acme.com
```

.Start the server
<@kc.start/>

By using the `keycloak.conf` file, the server can omit some steps at startup. As a result, the server starts faster.

== The auto-build option: automatic detection when the server needs a build

Under certain circumstances, you might prefer to allow a longer startup time in favor of updating the values of build options when starting the server. Using the `auto-build` option, you can perform the two configuration stages by using a single command. Note that using `auto-build` is very likely to double the startup time for Keycloak. For most environments, this approach is not optimal.

You start the server by entering the following command:

.Using the `auto-build` option
<@kc.start parameters="--auto-build --db postgres --db-url-host keycloak-postgres --db-username keycloak --db-password change_me --hostname mykeycloak.acme.com"/>

By including the `auto-build` option, the server calculates the build options that have changed and runs the `build` command, if necessary, before starting the server.

== Configuring the server by using configuration files

By default, the server always fetches configuration options from the `conf/keycloak.conf` file. For a new installation,
this file holds only the recommended settings for running in production and those settings are commented out.

You can also specify a different configuration file by using the `[-cf|--config-file] option by entering the following command:

.Running the `build` command using a custom configuration file
<@kc.build rootParameters="-cf myconfig.conf"/>

.Running the `start` command using a custom configuration file
<@kc.start rootParameters="-cf myconfig.conf"/>

Changes to any *build option* defined in the `keycloak.conf` file that is targeted for the `build` command are ignored
if the value differs from the value for the last `build` command. In this case, make sure you run the `build` command again so that
any build option is updated accordingly.

=== Development versus production mode

The server supports the following operating modes:

Development mode:: This mode is activated every time you run the `start-dev` command. In this mode, some key configuration options are set to make it possible to start the
server for development purposes without the burden of having to define additional settings that are mandatory for production.

Production mode:: This mode is activated when you run the `build` or `start` command. Use this mode to set any configuration option that
is needed for deploying Keycloak in production.

By default, the configuration options for the production mode are commented out in the `conf/keycloak.conf`. These examples
 are meant to give you an idea about the main settings to consider when running in production.

== Setup of the initial admin user

The initial admin user can be added manually using the web frontend when accessed from localhost or automatically using environment variables.

To add the initial admin user using environment variables, set `KEYCLOAK_ADMIN` for the initial admin username and `KEYCLOAK_ADMIN_PASSWORD` for the initial admin password.
Keycloak uses them at the first startup to create an initial user with administration rights.
Once the first user with administrative rights exists, you can use the UI or the command line tool `kcadm.[sh|bat]` to create additional users.

== Unsupported server options

In most cases, the available options from the server configuration should suffice to configure the server.
However, you might need to use properties directly from Quarkus to enable a specific behavior or capability that is missing from the server configuration.

As much as possible, avoid using properties directly from Quarkus. If your need is essential, consider opening an https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/issues/new?assignees=&labels=kind%2Fenhancement%2Cstatus%2Ftriage&template=enhancement.yml[issue] first and help us
to improve the server configuration.

To configure the server using Quarkus properties, perform the following steps:

. Create a `conf/quarkus.properties` file and define any property you need.
. Run the `build` command to apply the settings to the server

For a complete list of Quarkus properties, see the https://quarkus.io/guides/all-config[Quarkus documentation] .

</@tmpl.guide>
